As a product manager,
your KPIs cannot be measured by you or
your data science team without an events instrumentation plan and strategy.
KPIs are measured through analyzing and calculating events.
Events are data points that are produced whenever an action happens.
Here are some examples.
When you finish playing a song on Spotify an event is produced called songPlayed.
That's just a guess, I don't work at Spotify so I
don't know the actual name, but regardless.
When you sign in to your account on Spotify,
an event is produced called userSignedIn.
When you click into a piece of content on Netflix
from the homepage to go to the detail page,
an event is produced called detailPageViewed.
Events themselves have additional properties that tell you more metadata
or information about the details of that event. Here is an example.
When I finish playing a song on Spotify,
a songPlayed event is produced.
These following properties tell us more about what happened during the event.
Events don't just come straight out of the box when your engineers develop the product,
instrumentation is the act of ensuring that events are produced,
saved, cleaned, and stored in a database for access.
Data-driven product managers set instrumentation strategy so that data scientists,
analysts, and the product manager herself or
himself has the right data they need to make future decisions.
To set up an instrumentation strategy,
you'll need to work backwards.
Start out with the KPIs you've defined and break down the user
steps it takes to contribute to the KPI in a positive manner, end-to-end.
Here is an example. Let's say,
you're the PM for a restaurant review and food delivery app.
One of your objectives this year is to increase delivery engagement and retention.
One of your KPIs to support this objective is to increase
the number of delivery bookings per week divided by the number of users registered.
Given that there are multiple steps in the app that a user has to go through
to order a delivery and that a user could drop off at any point,
we'll need to know when the final users tend to drop off so that we could focus
running experiments in the hopes of
improving conversion rates on that specific final step.
Let's walk through the individual steps that a user
has to take in order to complete a delivery order.
A user goes into the restaurant detail page,
a user clicks on "Delivery",
the user enters in their orders from the menu options,
and user fills out their billing information, and hits "Submit".
Finally, a user confirms their order.